---
title: Chat Demo - Stage 1a - The server and client
layout: post
categories: chat_app
tags: node.js javascript websockets socket.io npm
---

Now that the folder structure for the Chat app is set up, we can start writing the client and server.

# The Server

I'm using the [Express](expressjs.com) framework to handle the web stuff in node.

## The index.js controller

chat.js
{: .listing-header}

{% highlight javascript %}

  {% include {{site.baseurl}}stage_1/chat.js %}

{% endhighlight  %}

### The HTTP server instance

The HTTP server is created with the line `require('http').Server`

`Server` is an alias to the createServer function and returns a new Server instance. The express app is set as the
request listener.

<div class="note" markdown='1'>
You have to create the server yourself and not just let Express do it for you implicitly, becuase you need the
Server instance to attach the websocket (see [below](#the-socketio-handler)).
</div>


### Static files

`app.use(serveStatic('public'));`

<div class="note" markdown='1'>
The `serveStatic` middleware will serve all files in the `public` folder to the '/' route.
i.e. asking for `/css/chat.js` in the browser will serve up the file in `public/css/chat.css`.

Usually, I'll use NginX to serve static files; this is fine for development
</div>

### Jade templates

`app.set('view engine','jade');`

The [Jade templating](jade-lang.com) language make writing HTML pages a lot cleaner and simpler.

The templates for the main chat page look like this


<div class="caption">layout.jade</div>
{% highlight jade %}

    doctype html
    html
       block head
          title= title
          link(rel='styleSheet', href='/css/chat.css')
          script(src='/js/jquery/dist/jquery.min.js')
          script(src='/js/sprintf/src/sprintf.js')
          script(src='https://cdn.socket.io/socket.io-1.2.1.js')
          script(src='/js/client.js')

       body
          header#banner
             h1 The #ChatRoom
             #status.
                Connection status:

          block content
          footer
             Enjoy high speed communications

{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight jade %}

    extends layout
    block content
       section#chatroom
          #messages
          input#message(type='text', placeholder='Type your message here')
          input#send(type='button', value='Send')

{% endhighlight %}


## The route definitions

The routes are pulled out and exported from the `lib/routes.js` file. This makes the main controller far
cleaner and more elegant. At this stage the `routes.js` file doesn't contain much:

{% highlight javascript %}

     exports.index = function(req, res) {
      res.render('index');
    };

    exports.css = function(req, res) {
        if (req.params[0]) {
            res.sendFile('css/' + res.params[0]);
        }
    };
{% endhighlight %}

## The socket.io handler

The code to handle websocket communication is really straightforward and illustrates the beauty of socket.io

{% highlight javascript %}

    var io = require('socket.io');
    exports.initialise = function(server) {
        var io = require('socket.io')(server);
        io.on('connection', function(socket) {
            console.log('Socket.io connection established.' );
            socket.emit('serverMessage','Welcome to the #ChatRoom');
            socket.on('userMessage', function(payload) {
                socket.broadcast.emit('userMessage', payload);
                socket.emit('myMessage', payload.msg);
            });
        });
    };

{% endhighlight  %}

This little piece of code already provides enough usability for a simple chat app. Behind the scenes you get the following
    out of the box:

* Fallback to XHR or polling if WebSockets aren't supported
* Automatic reconnection
